---
layout: post
title: Lecture 1 - Introduction
date: 16/09/30
---

# Welcome!
Welcome to the Introduction to Programming SSMU minicourse! I'm Marc, and I'll be your instructor for the semester. Whether you are reading this because you registered to the course, or because you randomly stumbled on the link to this site, I hope that the material that you'll find here will serve you well in your quest for new skills.

## About the course
This course is not meant to make you an expert in Java, but to introduce you to computer science and software development in a relaxed setting, without grades or examinations. Programming is a _practice intensive_ activity. The time you invest into practicing is therefore directly correlated to how well you'll retain what we discuss in class and how complex the projects you'll be able to take on will be. Weekly problem sets about what we're studying will be posted in the _Problem sets_ section, as well as extra problems that you can try and work on to go further. 

Any topic we see in class will also be detailled here, along with extra examples that we won't necessarily have time to see in class. Feel free to peruse all of that in your free time. PDFs of each lecture entry will also be available if you would prefer working offline.

If you have any questions about anything related to the course (or its logistics), or would like to suggest topics we could look into later in the course, feel free to email me at [c.marcandre@gmail.com](mailto:c.marcandre@gmail.com). To allow me to prioritize everything from course students, please add _SSMU Minicourse_ or _Intro to Programming_ in the email title.

## Setting up your work environment
Coding in Java requires a few tools. First, you need to make sure that your [Java Runtime Environment (JRE)](https://java.com/en/download/) is up-to-date, same for your [Java Development Kit (JDK)](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html). Similarly, we'll be using an _Integrated Development Environment_ (also called _IDE_) to produce, manage and test our code. An IDE brings together all the tools needed to code, such as a _compiler_, a _linter_, a spread of useful _plugins_ and a _project manager_. Those terms are defined later in this lecture, in the __How Eclipse works__ section. The IDE that we will be using is called [Eclipse](www.eclipse.org), make sure to choose the _Java Developer_ edition, as Eclipse can work with a variety of different languages.

_If you are experiencing trouble setting up your computer, please send me an email and I'll make sure to meet with you outside of class to help you out._

## Our first program
Our first program, dubbed _Hello, world_, is a bit of a piece of history. First written in the 1970s at Bell Labs by people pioneering computer science and engineering, it has been adopted as the quintessential basic program that hundreds of thousands are taught every year in classroom across the globe. The program itself has quite an history, which you can read [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%22Hello,_World!%22_program#History) if interested. It is written in many languages depending on the context, but it always does one sinle thing: it prints 'Hello, world!' to the screen.

Without further ado, let's take a look at it:

```java

public class HelloWorld {
  public static void main(String[] args) { 
    System.out.println("Hello, world!");
  }
} 

```

You may think "Damn, there's a lot of keywords in there!" Worry not, we'll come to understand what each of them do in due time.

Let's cut it into pieces:

```java
public class HelloWorld { ... }
```

This first line will be at the top of all the Java files we'll write. It defines a __class__. Think of classes as _top-level containers_ for your code. For now, the only important things to remember about them is that ...

- Each Java file must have a single class;
- The class must have the same name, case-sensitive, as the file it's in.

```java
public static void main(String[] args) { ... }
```

This defines a _method_, or function, called the _main method_. This main method is the one that _always_ gets run when you compile and run a Java file. 

More generally, _methods_ define code blocks that can take in _parameters_ and spit out a _return value_. A generic model for methods that we can start with is as follows:

```java
public static <Return type> <Method name>(<parameters>) {...}
```

As we'll see later, we can use methods to _organize our code_ and make sure that as much of our code as possible is reusable, saving us from having to repeat ourselves. We'll learn more about methods in the next section, but in the meantime, the take home message is ...

- To be able to run, a Java file needs a main method;
- That main method always is defined using the header shown in the Hello, World program;
- Everything that is in the main method will be executed when you run the file.

Finally, the innermost part of our program, the print command:

```java
System.out.println("Hello, world!");
```

The `System.out.println` command tells the system to print whatever we give it as _parameter_ to the screen. In this case, the sentence "Hello, world!" If you have set up your work environment properly, you should be able to type this program in, compile and execute it. Using Eclipse to do this will be covered in details in the next lecture.
