---
layout: post
title: Topic 8 - File input and output
date: 24/11/10
---

## Try/catch blocks

__Try/catch blocks__ are an essential part of Java that allows us to run 'risky' code without crashing our programs. Operations like _reading from_ and _writing to_ files could cause program crashes in the scenario where, for example, the file being opened doesn't exist or isn't accessible; in these cases, we need a structure to 'catch' an error if it comes up.

Java's try/catch structure looks like this:

```java

try {
  //Risky code
} catch(Exception e) {
  //What do do when the exception happens
} finally {
  //Executed once the try end.
}

```

## Reading from files

Reading files in Java is fairly simple, it all turns around two objects: the _FileReader_ and the _BufferedReader_. 

- The _FileReader_ opens the file and allows you to read one character at a time using the _read()_ method, which returns an integer representing the character being read;
- The _BufferedReader_ uses the _FileReader_ and allows you to read a whole line at a time instead of a single character. That way, you can read files much faster. Using the _readLine()_ method, you can extract a line from the file and put it in a String.

Using the _BufferedReader_, you can then loop through a file until you reach the end of the file, at which point the return value of _readLine()_ will be `null`. Since this is 'risky' code, it needs to be run in a _try/catch block_.

```java

try {
  FileReader fr = new FileReader("myFile.txt");
  BufferedReader br = new BufferedReader(fr);
  
  String line;
  while((line = br.readLine()) != null) {
    //process the line
  }
  
  br.close();
} catch(IOException e) {
  e.printStackTrace();
} finally {
  //Executed at the end of the try block.
}

```

## Writing to files

Writing for files is similar, but only uses one object: _FileWriter_. The principle is the same, and the code interacting with the file needs to be enclosed in a try/catch block for safety.

```java

try {
  FileWriter fw = new FileWriter("myFile.txt",true);
  
  fw.write("Something to write to the file");
  
  fw.close();
} catch(IOException e) {
  e.printStackTrace();
} finally {
  //Executed at the end of the try block.
}

```

Note the second parameter of the _FileWriter_ constructor: it denotes whether the new content is _appended_ to the file (in which case the value should be `true`) or if it replaces whatever is in the file (in which case the parameter should be `false`).
