---
layout: post
title: Topic 6 - Objects
date: 16/11/03
---

Organizing our code as _methods_ is efficient, but we can go one step furthers and start thinking in terms of _objects_.

## Object-oriented programming

In programming, the term _object_ is used to refer to a _data structure_ that we can define ourselves to better manage data and abstract tangible things into code. In practical terms, an object is a _class_ that contains variables (called _instance variables_) and methods (called _instance methods_). A simple object representing a person could look like this:

```java
public class Person {
  public String name;
  public int age;
  
  public Person(String name, int age) {
    this.name = name;
    this.age = age;
  }
  
  public sayHello() {
    System.out.println("Hello! My name is " + this.name + " and I'm " + this.age + " years old.");
  }
}
```

This _object_ would define a new _variable type_ called `Person`, we see that it contains two _instance variables_, a name and age, and one _instance method_, `sayHello()`. You may also notice a method named after the class, `Person(String name, int age)`: this method is special and is called a _constructor_. The constructor is the method that _instantiates_ (or initializes) the variable, and will set some basic values for the _instance variables_.

When using our object, we would do something like this:

```java
Person myPerson = new Person("Bob",22);
myPerson.sayHello();
```

In this case, we would _declare and instantiate_ a new `Person` object with the values "Bob" and 22 for the two instance variables, and then we call the `sayHello()` on our object, which would print `Hello! My name is Bob and I'm 22 years old.`

There are a few things to know about objects:

- Each object we instantiate is _independent_ from the others of the same type. If we create another `Person` variable, we can assign it its own name and age, and it will be entirely separate from the first one we created;
- Objects are created using the keyword _new_, just like arrays.
- We call methods on objects by appending ".methodName()" at the end of the object we want to call it on.

That being said, we already know of one object: `String`. As we've seen before, the `String` has a few _instance methods_ that we've used, such as `charAt(int)` and `length()`. If we remember some of the things we did with `String` variables such as the following, we realize that we're already familiar with how they work.

```java
String myName = "Marc";
int length = myName.length();
char firstletter = myName.charAt(0);
```

## The `this` keyword

When referring to _instance variables_, make sure to use the `this` keyword (`this.myVariable`).It ensures that Java knows that you are referring to the instance variable, in case there's also a local variable with the same name:

```java
public class myClass {
  public int myVar;
  
  public myClass() {
    int myVar = 5;
    this.myVar = 6;
    
    System.out.println(myVar + " " + this.myVar); //This prints 5 6
  }
}
```

### It's your turn

To apply our knowledge of objects, let's put together an object representing a _student_. As you may know, the average student has a name, an age, a student ID number, and an average. It should not only have a _constructor_ to be able to instantiate it, but also a few methods such as one that summarizes the information of the student.

## Objects within objects

To abstract more complicated structures into code, we can also use objects _within_ objects. Using our `Person`, we could make a `Class` object that contains an array of `Person`, which would represent, in code, the idea of a real classroom full of people. We could write it like this:

```java
public class Class {
  public Person[] people;
  
  public Class(int numberOfPeople) {
    this.people = new People[numberOfPeople];
  }
}
```

In this case, you could use your `Class` object to manage multiple `Person` objects. The possibilities are infinite!
