---
layout: post
title: Topic 4 - Conditional blocks
date: 16/10/18
---

In the past lectures, we discussed how we could use _for loops_ and _while loops_ to handle repetitive tasks. However, that is only useful if we want to repeat exactly the same task every time. Similarly, the programs we've discussed are fairly linear, in the sense that there is no conditional element to the way we process data. This is where _conditional blocks_ come into play.

## The basic if/else block

Conditional blocks are structures that will allow you to execute code based on _conditions_. In its most basic form, a conditional block looks like this:

```java
if(condition) {
  //Code to execute if the condition is true.
} else {
  //Code to execute otherwise.
}
```

In this case, whatever we put inside of the `if` segment will be executed _if and only if_ the condition(s) in the parentheses are _true_, otherwise, the `else` segment will be executed. Note that the `if` segment can be used alone (in which case it is simply skipped if the condition isn't satisfied), but the `else` segment cannot.

## Conditions

Of course, conditional blocks are only useful if we can define _conditions_ to use with them. In programming, conditions are defined as boolean values just like the ones we used in the first lecture when we discussed variable types. While you can use a `boolean` variable that you set up yourself, it is often more useful to use _boolean expressions_ to build conditions.

Boolean expressions are expressions that evaluate to true or false, and that are composed of _comparison operators_.

|Operator|Meaning|
|:---|:---|
|A == B| A is equal to B|
|A != B| A is not equal to B|
|A < / > / <= / >= B | A is lesser/greater/lesser or equal/greater of equal than B|
|!A| Not A; if A is true, then !A is false, and vice versa|

So for example, consider a conditional block like the following.

```java
if(i > 5) {
  // code ...
}
```
In this case, the code inside the block would only be executed _if and only if_ the variable `i` has a value larger than 5. You can also do arithmetic, for example, `i + 1 > 5` would evaluate to `true` for i = 5,6,7,8,9... since we are comparing the value of i + 1 and 5. Similarly, you can compare variables, such that if you wrote `i < j`, you would only get `true` if i is smaller than j, and false otherwise.

This is useful, because it allows us to compare numerical values easily and to add some cool features to our programs. For example, we could combine a _for loop_ and a _conditional block_ to print integers between 0 and 5 excluding 4:

```java
int i;
for(i = 0 ; i <= 5 ; i = i + 1) {
  if(i != 4) {
    //If i is not equal to 4
    
    System.out.println(i);
  }
} 
```

### It's your turn!

Using your newfound knowledge of conditional blocks, let's try the following exercise:

Given an array of type `double` representing grades `double grades[] = {90.6,65.2,45.5,89.0,34.6,59.9};`, build a small program that will calculate the _average_ of all the grades (you can refer to Problem set 2, which contains an exercise in which you use a _for loop_ to calculate averages), and that will only print the grades that are above it. For example, if the average calculated it 50, your program should print

```java
90.6
65.2
89.0
59.9
```

Note that to do that, you should have _two_ loops: one to calculate the average, and the other to print the relevant values.

## Compounding conditions

We might also want to have our blocks executed depending on multiple conditions. In this case, we have two operators to help us:

|Operators|Meaning|
|:---|:---|
|A && B| Logical AND: if A and B are true, then A && B is true|
|A \|\| B| Logical OR: if either A or B is true (or both), then A \|\| B is true|

If we revisit the previous example, we might want to modify it to print integers between 0 and 5 excluding 2 and 4:

```java
int i;
for(i = 0 ; i <= 5 ; i = i + 1) {
  if(i != 4 && i != 2) {
    //If i is not equal to 4 and i is not equal to 2
    
    System.out.println(i);
  }
} 
```

Note that you can combine as many conditions as you want, and they do not have to be similar. For example, you could have `(i > 50 && i < 90) || (i == 95)` which would evaluate to true if i is greater than 50 but lower than 90, OR if i is equal to 95. 

### It's your turn

Given the previous exercise that had you calculate an average of grades and print only the grades above average, try modifying to code so that only grades that are within 15% of the average are printed. What kind of conditions could you combine to produce that result?

## Adding extra segments

Finally, we may have second choices if our initial condition isn't satisfied that we'd like considered before hitting the `else` segment. To add extra outcomes to your conditional block, you can use the `else if` segment once an `if` has been used.

```java
if(i < 5) {
  //Code.
} else if(i < 10) {
  //Other code.
} else if(i < 50) {
  //Other other code.
} else {
  //What happens if all else fails
}
```

In this scenario, our `else if` behaves exactly like a normal `if`, except it comes second to an existing `if`. Since our Java programs run from top to bottom, the `if` is considered first; if it is not satisfied, the following `else if` is considered; if it isn't satisfied either, the next one in line is considered, all the way down to the `else` that ends the chain if present. 

You can use exactly the same type of conditions for your `else if` segments than with your `if` segments.

### It's your turn!

To practice `if/else if/else` segments, look up Problem set 2 for the McGill grading scheme problem.


  
