---
layout: post
title: Lecture 3 - Loops
date: 16/10/13
---

# Loops

Another very useful building block of programming is the __loop__. It comes in many forms, as we'll see later in this section, but regardless of how we write it, it has one goal: take care of _repetitive_ tasks for us so we don't have to copy/paste code that we need to run repeatedly. For example, a loop could help us scan through an array using the indexing method we've seen earlier (in this case, the loop would increment the index at each cycle to allow your code to apply on each element of the array), or it could help us sort data alphabetically (as we'll see later in the course).

## For loops

The first loop type that we'll look at is the _for loop_. Its general form is as follows:

```java
for( initial conditions ; ending conditions ; actions to take after each cycle ) {
  //Your code
}
```

The _initial conditions_ represent the 'initial setup' of our loop. In most cases, is contains the declaration and/or initialization of a counter. For example, you could set a variable to 0 so you can use it later to count how many times the loop ran.

The _ending conditions_ represent one of more conditions that will be checked at the _start_ of each cycle. As long as it's true, our loop will run.

The _actions to take after each cycle_ are instructions that will be executed once a cycle is done. It often contains an instruction to increment the counter initialized in the _initial conditions_.

Now, let's put this together in a concrete example:

```java
for(int i = 0 ; i < 5 ; i = i + 1) {
  System.out.println(i);
}
```

If we look at the loop's declaration, we see that our _initial conditions_ declare and initialize a variable `i` of type `int` and of value 0. This variable will be used as a counter to keep track of how many times the loop ran. Then, we see that our _ending condition_ is `i < 5`: as long as the counter variable `i` satisfies this condition, our loop will be allowed to repeat. Finally, our _post-cycle action_ is to increment the value of `i` by 1: `i = i + 1`, or 'i becomes the current value of i plus 1.'

If we were to put this in a program and run it, we'd see that it prints the value of the counter on a line at each cycle. Of course, we could do more sophisticated things with it, including looping through arrays (remember when we used a variable as an index).

### It's your turn!

To try out for loops, try putting together the following:

- A program that prints all number from 0 to 10;
- A program that prints every element of an array of your choice (hint: set up your array using an _array literal_ before you set up the loop, then try using an variable as an index to access your array from within the loop)

## While loops

Similar to our _for loop_, the _while loop_ will run as long as its _ending conditions_ are true. To declare it, we can simply use the _while_ keyword:

```java
while(ending condition) {
  //Your code
}
```

Much like in the _for loop_, the ending condition is evaluated every time a loop cycle begins, and as soon as the condition is no longer satisfied, the program exits the loop and continues on to the next element of your program. If we wanted to repeat the example we had with the _for loop_, we would write this:

```java
int i = 0;
while(i < 5) {
  System.out.println(i);
  i = i + 1;
}
```

First, notice that since the while loop only requires an ending condition, we have to take care of the counter outside of it, if necessary. In this case, we set up our counter variable `i` before we write out the loop. We also have to take care of incrementing our counter at each loop cycle. 

As a general rule, _anything_ you can do with a _for loop_ can also be done with a _while loop_, the difference is mainly related to style and preference.

### It's your turn!

To get a handle of _while loops_, try transforming the two _for loops_ you wrote earlier into _while loops_. This involves moving some things around, but nothing should be added.
