---
layout: post
title: Lecture 1: Introduction
---

#Welcome!
Welcome to the Introduction to Programming SSMU minicourse! I'm Marc, and I'll be your instructor for the semester. Whether you are reading this because you registered to the course, or because you randomly stumbled on the link to this site, I hope that the material that you'll find here will serve you well in your quest for new skills.

##About the course
This course is not meant to make you an expert in Java, but to introduce you to computer science and software development in a relaxed setting, without grades or examinations. Programming is a _practice intensive_ activity. The time you invest into practicing is therefore directly correlated to how well you'll retain what we discuss in class and how complex the projects you'll be able to take on will be. Weekly problem sets about what we're studying will be posted in the _Problem sets_ section, as well as extra problems that you can try and work on to go further. 

Any topic we see in class will also be detailled here, along with extra examples that we won't necessarily have time to see in class. Feel free to peruse all of that in your free time. PDFs of each lecture entry will also be available if you would prefer working offline.

If you have any questions about anything related to the course (or its logistics), or would like to suggest topics we could look into later in the course, feel free to email me at [c.marcandre@gmail.com](mailto:c.marcandre@gmail.com). To allow me to prioritize everything from course students, please add _SSMU Minicourse_ or _Intro to Programming_ in the email title.

##Setting up your work environment
Coding in Java requires a few tools. First, you need to make sure that your [Java Runtime Environment (JRE)](https://java.com/en/download/) is up-to-date, same for your [Java Development Kit (JDK)](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html). Similarly, we'll be using an _Integrated Development Environment_ (also called _IDE_) to produce, manage and test our code. An IDE brings together all the tools needed to code, such as a _compiler_, a _linter_, a spread of useful _plugins_ and a _project manager_. Those terms are defined later in this lecture, in the __How Eclipse works__ section. The IDE that we will be using is called [Eclipse](www.eclipse.org), make sure to choose the _Java Developer_ edition, as Eclipse can work with a variety of different languages.

_If you are experience trouble setting up your computer, please send me an email and I'll make sure to meet with you outside of class to help you out._

##Our first program
