---
layout: post
title: Topic 5 - Organizing code
date: 16/11/03
---

Now that we know about _loops_, _conditional blocks_, _variables_ and everyting else we need to implement basic functions, it's time to scale up. So far, we've built smaller applications that often do one single thing, and putting all of our code in the `main` method made sense. However, as the programs we make become more complex, we'll notice that our `main` method would quickly become a gigantic monolith. Moreover, since our code is executed from top to bottom, if we want to repeat some operation, we would need to copy and paste the code implementing it at multiple places in our `main`. To solve that issue, we introduce the idea of __methods__. 

__Methods__, also called _functions_, aim to implement a single task so that it can be reused multiple times without having to copy and paste code anywhere. It also serves to make our code more _modular_: we'll later see that we can use methods written in _other files_ when needed, such that we could write a _library_ of methods that would serve to process `String` variables, for example, and use it in our other programs.

## Our main method

In our very first program, we talked about the `main` method and what it does. The other methods that we'll see (and write) will follow the same kind of structure. However, let's keep in mind a few facts about our main method:

- The `main` method is unique, there can be only one inside a class. There may also be none, if the class isn't meant to be run directly (such as in the case of a _library of methods_, in which case we aim to use the methods elsewhere rather than run them directly);
- The `main` method is what is being _run_ when we run the file. If it's not in that method, it's not being considered when we run the program. That means that our other methods will have to be _called_ from our `main` method to be effective;
- It's header is always the same, namely `public static void main(String[] args) {...}`, you can learn it by heart, it will always be useful.

## General method structure

From our `main` method, we can expand and write our own methods. The general canvas for writing methods is as follows:

```java
[access] [instantiation] [return type] [method name]([argument type] [argument name]) {...}
```

- _access_ refers to either `public`, `private` or `protected`. This defines who can access this method. A _public_ method can be used by anyone, a _private_ method can only be used from within this class and _protected_ is a middle-ground. For the purpose of this course, we can keep everything `public`.
- _instantiation_ refers to the `static` keyword. As we'll see in the next topic, _static_ method are called by themselves, while _non-static_ methods are called on objects. This will be explained in detail in the next topic.
- _return type_ refers to what the method will _give back_ to whoever calls it. It can be `void` if nothing is expected, or a variable type such as `int` and `double` if our method produces some result.
- _method name_ refers to the name of the method, which we will use if we want to call the method. Be careful not to use any [reserved keywords](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Java_keywords), as these are words that Java looks for when compiling.
- _arguments_ refers to whatever data we want to pass to our method. Our method won't be aware of what goes on outside unless we give it data.

From there, we can fill in some of the fields with values we expect to see often:

```java
public static void myMethod(int myargument) {...}
```

Most of our methods until we get into objects will be `public` and `static`, as we do not yet need to specify those. The return type can change depending on what your method does, and so can the method name and arguments.

Let's use this example to put together a simple method that calculates the average of an array of integers:

```java
public static double myAverage(int[] numbers) {
  double sum = 0.0;
  for(int i = 0 ; i < numbers.length ; i = i + 1) {
    sum = sum + numbers[i];
  }
  
  return sum / numbers.length;
}
```

We've put together this code before, but it was inside of our `main` method. Notice that our `myAverage` method has to be aware of the numbers it needs to average, hence why we _pass_ an array to it through the arguments. Moreover, it will _return_ a `double`, since our average can be a fractional number.

Once that we have our method, how can we use it? Nothing is simpler:

```java
int[] myGrades = {100,70,60,90,50};
double myAvg = myAverage(myGrades);
```

Here, we call our method, and save its _return value_ to the `myAvg` variable. Notice that the type of the variable that receives that value is the same as the return type.

Using this, we can split our main methods into simpler units that we can reuse, which is good as we move forward! We could calculate multiple averages inside a single program without having to rewrite the average code all the time. Similarly, if we decide to _change_ our way of calculating it for a more efficient one, we only need to change the method's contents for it to be applied everywhere. Ultimately, using methods reduces the amount of code you have to put together to accomplish your goals.
