---
layout: post
title: Topic 7 - Data structures
date: 16/11/10
---

Now that we know about objects, control flow structures like for/while loops and if/if else/else blocks and the general use of variables, it's time to explore what Java provides to us to organize our data. So far, we've used _arrays_ a lot, but we also discussed that the array data structure was very limited because of its _fixed size_.

## Arraylist

The _ArrayList_ is a very important implementation of a classical data structure: the linked list. In practice, it expands on the idea of the array and, using objects, it allows us to have a _variable length_ array instead of a _fixed length_ one.

The ArrayList is part of the `java.util.ArrayList` package, which you need to _import_ by adding `import java.util.ArrayList;` at the top of the file in which you are using the list:

```java
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class MyClass {
//Code...
}

```

Similarly to what we've seen before with objects, we can initialize a new ArrayList by using the `new` keyword, but this time, we also need to specify the _type_ of what we want to store:

```java
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class MyClass {
  ArrayList<Integer> myList = new ArrayList<Integer>();
}

```

Here, we declare an ArrayList meant to contain variables of type Integer, which are simply a _wrapper_ (or object-version) for the primitive `int` type.

Notice that we do not need to specify a _length_ for our list: the length is incremented as you add items so it is always as long as the number of items contained in it. You do not have to manage the size of the ArrayList yourself! How wonderful!

### Basic operations on ArrayLists

The operations that we've seen before on the simple array have equivalents in the ArrayList. The basic operations that we should know of are _accessing_, _adding_, _removing_ and _evaluating size_.

To access an item in the ArrayList, we can use `myList.get(index)` where `index` is the zero-based index at which the element we wish to access is. In this case, the element will be returned so that if we write:

```java
System.out.println(myList.get(5));
```

The element at index 5 of our ArrayList `myList` will be printed.

Similarly, we can _add_ items to the list by using `myList.add(item)` where `item` is the item we want to add. The item will them be added at the very end of our list. For example:

```java
myList.add(5);
```

Would add the integer `5` to the end of the list.

Finally, removing can be done using the index of the element we want to take out:

```java
myList.remove(5);
```

The previous code snippet will take out the element at index 5 from the list.

For looping purposes, we may also want to know _how many items we have in the list right now_, which we can get using `myList.size()` – an analogue of the array's `length` command.

Of course, this is only a small range of what we can do with ArrayLists, a full list of available _instance methods_ can be found [here](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/ArrayList.html).
