---
layout: post
title: Lecture 2 - Variables and loops
date: 16/10/05
---

# Variables

Variables are essential to programming because they provide the _first level of memory_ readily accessible when you write code.
You can use them to store data, transmit it from one method, program or device to another, and manipulate it in a myriad of ways.

There are two kinds of variables: __primitive__ variables and __reference__ variables. The former stores simple data like numbers and
characters, while the latter can contain sentences and elaborate data structures. 

## Primitive variables

Primitive variables are, as mentioned earlier, containers for numbers and single characters. In code, they are represented by a series of 
_shorthand_ codes that we call the _type identifier_. There are only a handful of different primitive types in Java, and from those, we
mostly use four of them: `int`, `double`, `boolean` and `char`.

Variable contents | Shorthand notation | Limits
:------:|:------:|:------:
_Bigger_ integers | `long` | -2^64 to 2^64-1
Integers | `int` | -2^32 to 2^32-1
Fractional numbers | `double` or `float` | At least as bit as `long`, with fractions
Small integers | `short` | -32728 to 32727
_Very_ small integers | `byte` | -128 to 127
Single characters | `char` | 0 to 255
True/False values | `boolean` | `true` or `false`

As a general rule, `int` variables can contain numbers up to roughly _2.1 billion_ in both positive and negative directions, and 
`double` can go even further, and also allow fractional values – these should be enough for all of the mathematical stuff
we will do over the class. For more information about all the types, what they can be used for, and when you should use them, I will add an
item in __Extras__.

Now that we know roughly what types of variables we can create, let's look into how to create them.

## Creating variables

Creating variables is done in two steps: __declaration__ and __initialization__. _Declaration_ refers to the definition of the variable's
type. This is only done _once_ since we cannot redefine our variables. _Initialization_ or _assignment_, on the other hand, can be done
multiple times and simply refers to the process of storing values in the variable we declared.

To __declare__ a variable, we can simply write `typeIdentifier variableName;` on a line, and from then on, we can use `variableName` to use 
and assign data to the variable. To __assign__, we can use the _assignment operator_: =. Giving a value to our variable would then look like
`variableName = someValue;`. We can also bring all of this together on one line and both declare and initialize on the same line, to give an 
_initial value_ to our variable: `typeIdentifier variableName = someValue;`. This model is used for all variables, regardless of the type.

Applying it, we could then declare a few variables:

`int myAge = 26;`

`double myMidtermScore = 101.5;`

`boolean excited = true;`

`char someLetter = 'a';`

Notice that in all of these cases, we add a _semi-colon_ at the end of the statement. This is __very__ important. This semi-colon 
marks the end of the statement, and if it's absent, Eclipse will not be able to compile and run our code. You may also have noticed that the `char` value is between single quotes.
This is also very important: _characters_ (and later, `String` variables, which represent groups of `char` values) need those quotes 
to be identified as characters.

Now that we know the gist of how variables are created, we can revisit the Hello, world example and modify it so it does a bit more.

For example, we can have the program print out a number of our choosing, or an arithmetic combination of numbers:

```java
public class HelloWorld2
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int myAge = 26;
    int retirementAge = 65;
    
    System.out.println(retirementAge - myAge);
  }
}
```

## Manipulating variables

As we saw in the last example, we can do some very basic arithmetic on number variables. The _operators_ in your toolbox to do this 
mimic the ones you would use in pen-and-paper math: +, -, *, / and so forth. When manipulating variables, always be mindful of the _variable type's limitations_.
For instance, dividing two integers will produce an integer, which can lead to puzzling results such as 1 / 2 = 0. To solve this problem,
we can either change the type of the variables we use, or _cast_ the variables to a certain type, if no precision is lost. For example:

```java
int myInteger = 1;
int anotherInteger = 10;
int firstResult = myInteger / anotherInteger; // <--- 0, because ints do not allow fractional numbers
double secondResult = (double) myInteger / anotherInteger; //<--- 0.1, because doubles allow fractional numbers
```

Notice that in any case, the variable type of the element in which we are storing the result has to have a type that is appropriate to
the data.

If we want to have more complex expressions, we can also use _parentheses_ the same way we do on paper to set the priority of operations:

```java
int result = ((1+2+3)/5)-17;
```

In this case, the _innermost_ parentheses' contents will be executed first, then the division, and finally, the subtraction. As we've seen before, you can also choose to insert variables in there if you want to use results from other operations.

### It's your turn!

Now that we know how to manipulate variables, try writing a short program that creates some primitives variables (remember to declare and initialize them as show before), uses arithmetic operators and prints the result to the screen using `System.out.println(...)`. Remember that in order to do this, you should first write the _class_ and _main method_ as shown in the _Hello, World_ example, and then put your code inside of the main method.

## Strings

Another very important variable type is the `String`. `String` isn't quite like the primitive variables we just discussed, it's a _reference_ variable. 
We will expand on why that is later. `String` variables contain words, or sentences – they represent groups of characters.

Much like the `char` that we have seen before, `String` values will be surrounded by quotes, but this time, __double quotes__:

```java
String myName = "Marc";
```

Since doing arithmetic on words doesn't really make sense, we won't use most of the operators we've mentioned before. However, we can use 
+ to _concatenate_ values to a `String`, making it longer. For example:

```java
String myName1 = "I am ";
String myName2 = "Marc";
String myName3 = myName1 + myName2 //<--- "I am " + "Marc" = "I am Marc"
```

We can also concatenate values that are __not__ `String` values:

```java
String myName = "I am Marc and I am ";
int myAge = 26;
String myName2 = myName + myAge; //<--- "I am Marc and I am 26"
```

That's extremely useful if we want to output the results of our operations to the screen! If we combine this with our Hello, world program,
we can get something like this:

```java
public class HelloWorldImproved {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int myAge = 26;
    String myName = "Marc";
    double myHeight = 1.85;
    
    System.out.println("Hello, world! I am " + myName + ", I am " + myAge + " years old and I am " + myHeight + " meters tall.");
  }
}
```

The above would first _concatenate_ our bits of `String` and our variables, and would print `Hello, world! I am Marc, I am 26 years old and I am 1.85 meters tall.` to the screen.

### It's your turn!

As a small exercise, define a few variables of your choice, and write a program that concatenates them together into a `String` and prints to the screen. You can take _Hello, world_ as an example.
You can also try adding more `System.out.println(...);` statements and print `boolean`, `char`, `short` and even `byte` variables to see what comes out!

